The following content is provided under a Creative
Commons license.
Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare
continue to offer high quality educational resources for free.
To make a donation or to view additional materials
from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare
at ocw.mit.edu.
So yesterday we saw how to define double integrals
and how to start computing them in terms of x and y
coordinates.
So we've defined the double integral of a region in plane
of a function f of xy dA.
You can hear me.
Is the sound working?
Can you hear me at the back now?
Can we make the sound louder?
Is this work?
Does this work?
And people are not hearing me at the back.
Is it better?
People are still saying make it louder.
OK, great.
Thanks.
So that's not an excuse to start chatting with your friends.
OK, so when we have a region in the xy plane
and we have a function of x and y,
we are defining the double integral of f over this region
by taking basically the sum of the values of a function
of a y and here times the area element.
And the definition actually is we split the region
into lots of tiny little pieces.
We multiply the value of the function at that point
times the area of a little piece and we sum that everywhere.
And we've seen actually how to compute these things
as iterated integrals.
So first integrating over dy, then over dx,
or the other way around.
So one example that we did in particular
was to compute the double integral of a quarter of a unit
disk so that was the region where x squared plus y squared
is less than 1 and x and y are positive of 1 minus x squared
minus y squared dA.
And well, hopefully I kind of convinced you
that we can do it using enough trig and substitutions
and so on, but it's not very pleasant.
And the reason for that is that using x and y
coordinates here doesn't seem very appropriate.
So in fact, we can use polar coordinates instead
to compute this double integral.
So remember that polar coordinates
are about replacing x and y as coordinates
for a point in the plane by instead r, which
is the distance from the origin to our point,
and theta, which is the angle measured counterclockwise
from the positive x axis.
So in terms of r and theta, you have x equals r cosine theta,
y equals r sine theta.
So the claim is we are able actually
to do double integrals in polar coordinates,
we just have to learn how to.
So just to draw a quick picture, when we were integrating
in x, y coordinates, in rectangular coordinates,
we were slicing our region by grid lines
that were either horizontal or vertical,
and we used that to set up the iterated integral.
And we said dA became dx dy or dy dx.
So now we are going to actually integrate
in terms of the polar coordinates r and theta.
So let's say we will integrate in the order
well r first and then theta.
That's the order that makes the most sense usually
when you do polar coordinates.
So what does that mean?
It means that we will first focus on a slice
where we fix the value of theta.
And we let r vary, so that means we fix a direction,
we fix a ray out from the origin in a certain direction.
And we'll travel along this ray and see which part of it,
which values of r are in our region.
So here it will be actually pretty easy,
because r will just start at zero,
and you'll have to stop when you actually exit
this quarter disk.
Well, what's the equation of this circle in polar coordinates?
It's just r equals 1.
So we'll stop when r is 1.
What about theta?
Well, the first ray that we might want to consider
is the one that goes along the x-axis.
That's when theta equals zero,
and we'll stop when theta reaches pi over 2,
because we don't care about the rest of the disk.
We only care about the first quadrant.
So we'll stop at pi over 2.
Now there's a catch for,
which is that dA is not dr d theta.
So let me explain to you why.
So let's say that we are slicing,
what it means really is that we are cutting our region
into little pieces that are the elementary,
what corresponds to a small rectangle in the xy coordinate system.
Here would be actually a little piece of circle
between a given radius r and r plus delta r,
and given an angle theta and theta plus delta theta.
So I need to draw actually a bigger picture of it,
because it makes it really hard to read.
So let's say that I fix an angle theta,
and a slightly different one,
where I've added delta theta to it.
And let's say that I have radius r,
and I add delta r to it.
So then I'll have a little piece of xy plane that's in here,
and I have to figure out what is its area,
what is delta A for this guy.
Well, let's see.
This guy actually, if my delta r and delta theta are small enough,
it will almost look like a rectangle.
It's rotated, but it's basically rectangle.
I mean, these sides, of course, are curvy,
but if they're short enough, it's almost straight.
So the area here should be this length times that length.
Well, what's this length?
That one is easy. It's delta r.
What about that length?
Well, it's not delta theta.
It's something slightly different.
It's a piece of a circle of radius r,
corresponding to angle delta theta.
So it's r delta theta.
So times r delta theta.
So that means now, even if we shrink things
and take smaller and smaller radians,
dA is going to be r, dR, d theta.
Okay, so that's the important thing to remember.
When you integrate in polar coordinates,
you just set up your bounds in terms of r and theta,
but you replace dA by r, dR, d theta.
Not just dR, d theta.
And then, of course, we have some function that we're integrating.
Let's say that I called that thing F.
Then it's the same F that I put up here.
So concretely, how do I do it here?
Well, my function F was given as, you know,
1-x square-y square.
And I like to switch that to polar coordinates.
I want to put r and theta in there.
Well, I have formulas for x and y in polar coordinates.
So I could just replace, you know, x squared by r squared cosine square theta.
y squared by r squared sine square theta.
And that works just fine.
But maybe you can observe that this is actually, you know,
this is x squared plus y squared.
It's just the square of a distance from the origin.
So that's just r squared.
Okay, that's a useful thing.
You know, if you don't strictly need it,
but it's much faster if you see this right away.
It saves you, you know, writing down a sine and a cosine.
So now we just end up with the integral from 0 to pi over 2,
integral from 0 to 1 of 1 minus r squared r, the theta.
Now, if I want to compute this integral,
so let's first do the inner integral.
So if I integrate r minus r cubed,
I will get r squared over 2 minus r squared over,
sorry, r to the 4 over 4 between 0 and 1.
And then I will integrate the theta.
So what is this equal to?
Well, for r equals 1, you get 1 half minus a quarter.
That's going to be just a quarter.
And when you plug 0, you get 0.
So it's the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of 1 quarter, the theta.
And that just integrates to the quarter of pi over 2,
which is pi over 8.
Okay?
So that's a lot easier than the way we did it yesterday.
Now, well, here we were lucky.
I mean, usually you will switch to polar coordinates either
because the region is easier to set up.
Here it's indeed easier to set up because, see, the bounds became very simple.
We don't have that square root of 1 minus x squared anymore.
Or because the integrant becomes much simpler.
Here, our function, well, it's not very complicated in xy coordinates,
but it's even simpler in our theta coordinates.
So here we were very lucky.
In general, there's maybe a trade-off.
Maybe it will be easier to set up the bounds,
but maybe the function will become harder
because it will have all these signs and cosines in it.
If our function had been just x,
x is very easy in xy coordinates.
Here it becomes our cosine theta.
That means you will have a little bit of trade to do in the integral.
Not a very big one, but not a very complicated integral.
But imagine, you know, it could get potentially much harder.
Okay. So anyway, that's the whole integral in polar coordinates.
And the way that you set up the bounds in general is,
so in 99% of the cases, you will integrate over r first.
So what you will do is you will look for a given theta.
What are the bounds for r to be in the region?
What is the portion of my ray that's in the given region?
And then you will put the bounds for theta.
But conceptually, it's the same as before.
Just instead of slicing horizontally or vertically,
we slice radially.
Okay. So we'll do more examples in a bit.
Any questions about this arbitrary normal method?
Yes?
When you say you're computing the rectangle with the biggest sign of the rectangle,
I'm curious when it is,
are the data set of r plus and tell the r?
Yes. So that's a very good question.
Okay. Yes. Why do I measure the length inside instead of outside?
Oops. Which one do we want?
This one.
So here, I said this side is r delta theta.
I could have said, actually, r delta theta is the length here.
Here, it's slightly more.
It's r plus delta r times delta theta.
But, you know, if delta r is very small compared to r,
then that's almost the same thing.
And this is an approximation anyway.
So I took this one because it gives me the simpler formula.
If you want, if you take the limit as delta r tends to zero,
then the two things become the same anyway.
Okay. The length, you know,
whether you put r or r plus delta r in here doesn't matter anymore.
If you imagine that, you know, this guy is infinitely small,
then really the length becomes the same.
Okay. We'll also see another proof of this formula
using changes of variables next week.
But, I mean, hopefully this is at least slightly convincing.
Okay. More questions?
Nope.
Okay. So let's see.
So we've seen how to compute double integrals.
I have to tell you what they're good for as well.
So the definition we saw yesterday,
and motivation was in terms of finding volumes.
Okay. But that's not going to be our main preoccupation
because, you know, finding volumes is fun,
but it's not all there is to life.
And, you know, I mean, you're doing single integrals.
When you do single integrals, it's usually not to find the
array of some region of a plane.
It's for something else, usually.
Okay. So the way we actually think of a double integral
is really as summing the values of a function,
all of our this region.
So we can use that to get information about maybe the region
or about the average value of a function in that region,
and so on.
So let's think about various uses of double integrals.
So the first one that I will mention is actually something
you thought maybe you could do with a simple integral,
with a single integral.
But it's useful very often to do it as a double integral.
It's to find the array of a given region of our plane.
Okay. So I give you, you know, some region in the plane.
And you want to know just its area.
So in various cases you could set this up as a single integral.
But often it could be useful to set it up as a double integral.
So how do you express the area as a double integral?
Well, the area of this region is the sum of the areas of all
the region of the region.
Okay. So the area of r is the double integral of r of a function
1. Let's.
So one way to think about it, if you're really still attached
to the idea of double integral as a volume, you know,
what this measures is the volume below the graph of a function 1,
the graph of a function 1 is just a horizontal plane at height 1.
So what should be measuring would be the volume of a prism or with base r and height 1.
And the volume of that, of course, would be base times height,
so it would just be the area of r again.
But we don't actually even need to think about it that way.
Really, what we're doing is we're summing dA over the entire region.
Okay. A related thing we can do.
So imagine that actually this is, you know, some object, some physical object.
I mean, it's got to be a flat object because we're just dealing with things in the plane so far.
But, you know, you have a flat metal plate or something.
And you would like to know it's mass.
Well, its mass is the sum of the masses of every single little piece.
And so you would get that by integrating the density.
The density for a flat object would be the area, sorry,
the mass per unit area.
Okay. So you can get the mass of a flat object.
With density, let's use delta for density,
which is the mass per unit area.
So each little piece of your object will have a mass,
which will be just the density, times its area, for each small piece.
And you will get the total mass by summing these things.
So the mass will be the double integral of the density times the area element.
Now, if it has constant density, you know, if it's always the same material,
then of course you could just take the density out and you will get density times the total area.
And if you know that it's always the same material.
But if actually it has varying density, maybe because it's some metallic thing,
but with various metals or with varying thickness or something,
then you can still get the mass by integrating the density.
So, I mean, of course looking at flat objects might be a little bit strange,
that's because we're only doing double integrals so far.
In a few weeks we'll be doing triple integrals,
and then we'll be able to do solids in space.
But, you know, one thing at a time.
Okay.
So.
Another useful application is to find the average value of some quantity in a region.
So what does it mean to take the average value of some function f in this region r?
Well, you know what's the average of, you know, a finite set of data.
For example, if I ask you to compute your average score on 18 or two problem sets,
you would just take the scores, add them up and divide by the number of problem sets.
What if there's infinitely many things?
Because, you know, say I ask you to find the average temperature in this room,
where you would have to measure the temperature everywhere,
and then add all of these together and divide by the number of data points.
But depending on how careful you are, actually there's potentially infinitely many points to look at.
So the mathematical way to define the average over a continuous set of data is that you actually integrate the function over the entire set of data.
And then you divide by the size of the sample, which is just the area of the region.
Okay.
So in fact, the average of f.
So the notation we'll use usually for that is f with a bar on top, okay, to tell us the average f.
That would be, so we say it, we'll take the integral of f, and we'll divide by the area of the region.
Okay. You can really think of it as the sum of the values of f everywhere,
divided by the number of points in everywhere.
And so that's an average where everything is actually equally likely.
You know, that's a uniform average where all the points in the region,
all the little pieces of the region, are equally likely.
But maybe if you want to do say an average over some solid with variable density,
or if you want to somehow give more importance to certain parts than to others,
then you could actually do a weighted average.
So what's a weighted average?
Well, you know, in the case of taking the average of your problem sets,
if I tell you well, problems set one is worth twice as much as the others,
then you would count twice that score in the sum, and then you would divide,
you would count it as two, of course, when you divide.
So the weighted average is the sum of the values that each weighted by a certain coefficient,
and then you will divide by the sum of the weights.
So it's a bit of the same idea as when we, you know, replace a rare by some mass
that tells you how important a given piece is.
So we'll actually have a density.
Let's call it delta again.
That would be now, well, we'll see what we divide by.
But what we will take is the integral times of a function times the density times the area element.
Because this would correspond to the mass element,
telling us how to weight the various points of our region.
And then we would divide by the total weight, which is the mass of the region.
So as defined up there.
Okay?
So, you know, if a density is uniform, then of course the density gets out, and you know,
you can simplify and reduce to that, if all the points are equally likely.
Okay, so why is that important?
Well, that's important for various applications.
But one that you might have seen in physics, we care about maybe where is the center of mass of a given object.
So the center of mass is basically the point, you know, you would call that point to be, you know,
you would say that point is right in the middle of the object.
But of course, if the object has a very strange shape, or if somehow part of it is heavier than the rest,
then that takes a very different meaning.
So strictly speaking, the center of mass of a solid is the point where you would have to concentrate all the mass.
If you wanted it to behave equivalently from the point of view of mechanics,
if you are trying to do translations of that object.
You know, if you were going to push that object, that would be really where, you know,
where the equivalent point of mass would lie.
So the other way to think about it, you know, if I have a flat object, then the center of mass is basically the point where I would need to hold it so that it's perfectly balanced.
You know, and of course I can do this because I'm not well, whatever.
But you get the feeling, I mean, the center of mass of this eraser is somewhere in the middle.
And so in principle, that's why I would have to put my finger for it to stay, well, and it doesn't work.
Okay, that's where the center of mass should be.
I think it should be in the middle.
So, well, maybe if you don't call this free, it should call this, maybe, you know, 2A or whatever.
It's, it's really a special case of the average value.
So, how do we find the center of mass of a flat object with the set of delta?
Well, so if you have your object in the xy plane, then its center of mass will be at positions that are actually just the coordinates of the center of mass.
So, the center of mass will just be the weighted of rages of x and y on the solid.
Okay, so the center of mass will be at a position that I will call x bar y bar.
And these are really just the average values of x and of y in the solid.
So, just to give it from you, let's begin.
The main x bar would be 1 of over mass times the double integral of x times density dA.
And same thing with y, y bar is the weighted average of y coordinate in your region.
Okay, so you see if you take a region that's symmetric and has uniform density that will just give you the center of the region.
But if the region has a strange shape, or if a density is not homogeneous, if parts of it are heavier, then, you know, you will get whatever weighted average will be.
And that would be the point where this thing would be balanced if you were trying to, you know, balance it on a pole or on your finger.
Okay.
Any questions so far?
No? Yes?
When you do that double integral over here, the inner one is y, y, y, y.
Oh, no, sorry. No, no. So, when you do, I mean, so here I set up this, I didn't set this up as an iterative integral yet.
Okay. So, here the function that I'm integrating is x times delta, where delta, you know, the density will be given to me maybe as a function of x and y.
And then I will integrate this dA. And dA could mean dx dy, it could mean dy dx, it could mean rdrd theta.
I will choose how to set it up depending maybe on the shape of the region.
You know, if my solid is actually just, you know, going to be round, then I might want to use polar coordinates.
If it's a square, I might want to use xy coordinates. If it's more complicated, well, I will choose depending on how I feel about it.
Yes? Yes?
Yes. So, delta is the density. It's in general, it's a function of x and y. If you imagine that your solid, you know, is not homogeneous, then its density will depend on which piece of it you're looking at.
Of course, to compute this, you need to know the density. If you have a problem asking you to find the center of mass of something and you have no information about the density, assume it's uniform.
Take the density to be a constant. Even take it to be a one, that's even easier if you want.
It's a general fact of math. We don't care about units. So, if density is constant, we might as well take it to be one.
That just means that our mass unit becomes the area unit.
Yes?
The area of origin in general of the central mass, we're using x to y coordinates. If we wanted to use polar coordinates, we would just search for a bigger space.
That's a good question. No, I don't think we could actually find the center of mass in polar coordinates by finding the average of r or the average of theta.
For example, take a disk center that the origin. Well, you know that the center of mass should be at the origin.
But the average of r is certainly not zero because r is positive everywhere. So that doesn't work.
You cannot get the polar coordinates of the center of mass just by taking the average of r and the average of theta.
But what's the average of theta? If you take theta to go from zero to two pi, the average theta will be pi.
If you take it to go from minus pi to pi, the average theta will be zero. So there's a problem there.
So that actually just doesn't work.
So we really have to compute x bar and y bar. But still we could compute them, you know, we could set this up and then switch to polar coordinates to evaluate this integral.
But we'd still be computing the average values of x and y.
Okay.
So the next thing, so we're basically re-exploring, you know, mechanics and motion of solids here.
So the next thing is moment of inertia.
So just to remind you, or in case you somehow haven't seen it in physics yet.
So the moment of inertia is basically to rotation of a solid, what the mass is to translation.
Okay. In the following sense, mass, the mass of a solid is what makes it hard to push it.
You know, how hard it is to throw something is related to its mass.
How hard it is to spin something on the other hand is given by its moment of inertia.
Maybe I should write this down. So mass is how hard it is to impart a translation motion to a solid.
So I'm using fancy words to the end.
And the moment of inertia.
So the difference with the masses at the moment of inertia is defined about some axis.
So you choose an axis, then you will try to measure how hard it is to spin your object around that axis.
For example, I can try to measure how hard it is to spin this sheet of paper about an axis that's in the center of it.
So I will try to spin it like that and see how much effort I have to make.
Well, for a sheet of paper, not very much, but.
So that would measure the same thing, but it would be rotation, motion, about that axis.
So maybe some of you know the definition.
If not, I'm going to try to derive it again.
I'm sorry, but it won't be quite as detailed as the way you've probably seen it in physics, but you know,
I'm not trying to replace your physics teachers. I'm sure they're doing a great job.
So what's the idea for the definition?
To find a formula for the moment of inertia.
So the idea is to think about kinetic energy.
Kinetic energy is really what, you know, when you push something or when you try to make it move,
you have to provide some energy to it.
And then it has kinetic energy.
And if you have a right device, then you can convert back that kinetic energy into something else.
So if you try to look at the kinetic energy of a point mass,
so you have something with mass m going at velocity V,
well, that will be one half of a mass times the square of the speed.
Hopefully you've all seen that formula sometime before.
Now let's say that instead of just trying to push this mass,
I'm going to make it spin around something.
So instead of just somewhere, maybe, you know, I will have the origin,
and I'm trying to actually make it go around the origin at a certain, you know,
in a circle, at a certain angular velocity.
So for a mass m, at distance r, let's call r this distance.
And angular velocity, let's call the angular velocity omega.
I think that's what physicists call it.
So remember, the angular velocity is just the rate of change of the angle over time.
It's d theta dt if you want.
Well, what's the kinetic energy now?
Well, first we have to find out what's the speed.
What's the speed?
Well, if we are going on a circle of radius r at angular velocity omega,
that means that in unit time, we rotate by omega,
and we go by a distance of r times omega.
So the actual speed is the radius times the angular velocity.
And so the kinetic energy is 1.5 mv squared, which is 1.5 mr squared omega squared.
And so, see, by similarity with that formula, we can think of,
so here, the coefficient of V squared is the mass.
And here we'll see the coefficient of omega squared,
so this thing is the moment of inertia.
That's how we define the moment of inertia.
Okay. Now that's only for a point mass.
And it's kind of fun to spin just a small ball,
but maybe you'd like to spin actually a larger solid
and try to define this moment of inertia.
Well, the moment of inertia of a solid will be just the sum of the moments of inertia
of all the little pieces.
So what we'll do is we'll just cut our solid into little chunks
and we'll sum this thing for each little piece.
Okay, so for a solid width density,
so each little piece has mass,
which is the density times the amount of area,
this is equal actually.
And the moment of inertia of a small portion of the solid will be
delta m, the small mass, times r squared,
the square of a distance to the center, to the axis around which I'm spinning.
So that means if I sum these things together,
well, so it has a moment of inertia,
delta m times r squared, which is r squared times the density times delta a.
And so I will be summing these things together.
And so the moment of inertia about the origin will be the double integral
of r squared times density times dA.
Okay, so the final formula for the moment of inertia about the origin
is the double integral of a region of r squared density dA.
Or if you're going to do it in x-y coordinates,
of course r squared becomes x squared plus y squared,
it's the square of the distance from the origin.
Okay, so when you integrate this, that tells you how hard it is to spin that solid
about the origin.
So the motion that we try to do, we keep this fixed,
and then we just rotate around the origin.
So that's a pretty bad picture, but hopefully you get what I mean.
Okay, and then the rotational energy, so the name we use for that is i0.
And then the rotational kinetic energy is one half times this moment of inertia
times the square of the angular velocity.
So it's in this sense that this replaces the mass for rotation motions.
Okay, what about other kinds of rotations?
So in particular here we've been rotating things about just a point in the plane.
What you could imagine also is instead you have your solid.
So what I've done so far is I've skewered it this way,
and I'm rotating around the axis.
Instead I could skewer it through, say, the horizontal axis,
and then I could try to spin about the horizontal axis.
So then it would rotate in space in that direction, like that.
So, let's say we do rotation about the x-axis.
Well, the idea would still be the same.
Okay, if moment of inertia for any small piece of the solid would be its mass element
times the square of the distance to the axis,
because that will be the radius of the trajectory.
If you take this point here, it's going to go on a circle like that,
center on the x-axis.
So the radius will just be this distance here.
Well, what's this distance?
It's just y, or maybe absolute value of y.
So distance to x-axis is absolute value of y,
and what we actually care about is the square of the distance,
so that it will just be y squared.
So the moment of inertia about the x-axis is going to be obtained by integrating y squared.
Thanks for my sentiment.
Okay, it's slightly strange that I have y in the inertia about the x-axis,
but if you think about it, why tell us me how far I am from the x-axis,
so how hard it will be to spin around the x-axis.
Okay, and I could do the same about any other axis that I want,
just I would have to sum the square of the distance to the axis of rotation.
Okay, so maybe I should do an example.
Yes.
Oh, sorry, same thing as above, distance to the x-axis.
Because that's what we care about, right, for the moment of inertia,
we want the square of the distance to the axis of rotation.
Okay, so let's do an example.
Let's try to figure out if we have just a uniform disc,
how hard it is to spin it around its center.
Okay, so that shouldn't be very hard to figure out.
So let's say that we have a disc of radius a,
and we want to rotate it about its center.
And let's say that it's a uniform density,
and let's take just the density to be one,
so that we don't really care about the density.
So what's the moment of inertia of that?
Well, we have to integrate over our disc, r squared times the density,
which is one, times dA.
Okay, what's r squared?
So you have here to resist the urge to say,
oh, the radius is just a, we know the radius is a.
No, it's not a, because we're looking at rotation of,
you know, any point inside this disc,
and when you're inside the disc, the distance to the origin is not a,
it's less than a, it's actually anything between zero and a.
Okay, so just you know to point out a pitfall,
r here is really a function on this disc,
and we're going to integrate that function.
Okay, don't plug r equals a, just yet.
Okay, what coordinates do we use to compute this integral?
We are probably polar coordinates,
I mean, unless you want to repeat of what happened already with, you know, X and Y.
So that will tell us we want to integrate r squared times r dr d theta.
And the bounds for r, well, r will go from zero to a,
no matter in which direction I go from the origin,
if I fix theta, r goes from zero to r equals a.
The part of this ray that lives inside the disc is always from zero to a.
And theta goes from, well, zero to two pi, for example.
Okay, and now you can compute this integral.
Well, I'll let you figure it out,
but the inner integral becomes a to the four over four,
and the outer multiplies things by two pi,
so you get pi a to the four over two.
No, yes.
Okay, so that's how hard it is to spin this disc.
Now, what about instead of spinning it about the center,
we decide actually to spin it about a point on the circumference?
So, you know, for example, think of a Frisbee, you know,
Frisbee, you know, it has this frame,
and so you can actually try to make it rotate around the point on the circumference.
By holding it, you know, near the remains, spinning it there.
How much harder is that than around the center?
Well, we'll try to compute now the moment of inertia about this point.
So we have two options.
One is we keep the system of coordinates centered here,
but then the formula for distance to this point becomes harder.
The other option, which is the one I will choose,
is to change the coordinates so that this point becomes the origin.
Okay, so let's do that.
Okay, so about a point on the circumference,
what I would have to do,
maybe, is set up my origin like that.
You know, now I've moved the origin so that it's on the circumference of the disc,
and I will again try to find the moment of inertia of this disc about the origin.
So it's still the double integral of r squared dA.
But now I want to find out how to set up the integral.
So I could try to use xy coordinates and it would work.
Or I can use polar coordinates and actually it works a little bit better that way.
But both are doable.
So let's say I do it this way.
So I have to figure out how to set up my bounds.
So what are the bounds for r?
Well, if I fix a value of theta,
so it means I chose an angle here,
and now I'm shooting a ray from the origin in that direction.
So I enter my region at r equals 0, but hasn't changed.
The question is, where do I exit the region?
So what is that distance?
So maybe you've seen a recitation, maybe not.
So let's see.
Well, actually I should have written down the radius of the circle is a,
so this distance here is 2A.
Okay, so if you draw this segment in here,
you know that here you have a right angle.
So you have a right triangle.
The hypotenuse here has length 2A.
This angle is theta.
Well, this length is 2A cosine theta.
Okay, so the polar coordinates equation of this circle passing
through the origin is r equals 2A cosine theta.
So r will go from 0 to 2A cosine theta.
Okay, that's the distance.
Now what are the bounds for theta?
It's not quite 0 to 2A because actually you see in this direction,
if I shoot a ray in this direction, I will never meet my region.
So I have to actually think a bit more.
Well, the directions in which I will actually hit my circle
are all the directions in the right half of a plane.
Okay, I mean, of course I should very close to the axis.
You might think, oh, I won't be in there, but actually that's not true
because here the circle is tangent to the axis.
So in no matter which direction I take,
I will still have a little tiny piece.
So the angle actually goes from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2.
So now if you compute that, you will get,
well, the inner integral will be r to the 4 over 4
between 0 and 2A cosine theta,
which will turn out to be 4A to the 4 cosine to the 4 theta.
And now you will integrate that from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2.
And well, that's again the evil integral that we had yesterday.
So either we remember the method from yesterday,
or we remember from yesterday that actually there's formulas
in the notes to help you.
So on homework, you can use this formula in the notes
at the beginning of section 3B.
There's formulas for these particular kinds of integrals.
And that will end up being three halves of pi a to the 4.
So in case you wanted to know,
it's three times harder to spin a frisbee
about a point in circumference than around the center.
See, we got three times the moment of inertia about the center.
Okay, that's it. Have a nice weekend.